Proposal: Restructuring Bylaws
(draft 5, 3/8/2001)

The following is a fourth draft of some bylaw changes that would enable the structural changes outlined in the Restructuring Proposal approved during the Spring 2000 Plenary.

The following changes are proposed:

1)	Delete all of Section 5-8,
The Function of General Assembly Committees in Meetings.

2)	Substitute all of Article 6,
Committees - Formation and Function

3)	Substitute most of Article 7 (except Sections 7-1 and 7-10),
Committees of the General Assembly

4)	Add new Article 8,
Working Groups of the General Assembly


Proposed new Articles 6, 7, and 8:
_____________________________________________________________________________________


ARTICLE 6:  COMMITTEES & WORKING GROUPS - FORMATION & FUNCTION.

SECTION 6-1.  DEFINITIONS, FORMATION, AND MEMBERSHIP

6-1.1	Definitions
a)	A Committee is a body established by the General Assembly or by another GPCA Committee, composed of one or more persons appointed by the establishing body, to consider, investigate, or take action on certain matters considered sensitive enough to warrant special supervision as defined in its charge or mission statement.
b)	A Working Group is a body established by the General Assembly, a Committee, or another Working Group, composed of one or more non-appointed persons, to consider, investigate, or take action on certain matters as defined in its charge or mission statement.
c)	The abbreviated term, Groups, is used within these Bylaws to refer to both Committees and Working Groups.
d)	A Standing Group is any Committee or Working Group defined within these bylaws. Standing Groups are established to consider recurring business of the party and have General Assembly agenda privileges (see proposal authority, paragraph 6-2.5).
e)	A Special Group is any Committee or Working Group not defined within these bylaws. Special Groups are ad hoc Groups established to consider non-recurring business of the party or are otherwise expected to dissolve themselves after completing their charge. Special Groups do not have General Assembly agenda privileges (see proposal authority, paragraph 6-2.5).

6-1.2	Formation of Standing Groups
Standing Groups must be defined within these bylaws. Establishing a new Standing Group or dissolving a current Standing Group requires an amendment to these bylaws (see Article 9).

6-1.3	Formation of Special Groups
Special Groups may be established by the General Assembly or another Group with a 2/3 vote. The statement of purpose or charge of the group must be stated at the time of formation. A Special Group may be dissolved with a 2/3 vote of the establishing body, but in any case, is automatically dissolved two years after its establishment or after completing its charge, whichever comes first. Expiring Special Groups may be reestablished at the discretion of the establishing body.

6-1.4	Standing Committee Membership
Coordinating Committee (CC) membership is defined in Section 7-1. Other Standing Committees shall be composed of no more than eight members not including ex-officio members (see ex-officio members, paragraph 6-1.7). At least once a year or whenever vacancies exist, the active counties, Group coordinators, and individual CC members shall be given the opportunity to submit nominations or recommendations to the Coordinating Committee for committee membership. Eligible candidates must have attended at least two prior State Plenaries within the previous 12 months and demonstrate a working knowledge of the State Party Bylaws and operating procedures. Standing Committee members shall be appointed by the Coordinating Committee and shall serve for two years or the remainder of the current term. Terms begin and end on the second plenary of each year and must be staggered whenever possible. Members appointed more than 12 months after the start of the current term shall serve for the remainder of the current term plus two more years. Any Standing Committee member can be recalled with an 2/3 vote of the CC.

6-1.5	Special Committee Membership
Special Committee members shall be elected by the body which established the committee. Committee members shall serve for two years or until the committee is dissolved, whichever comes first. Any committee member can be recalled with an 2/3 vote of the body which appointed or elected the member.

6-1.6	Working Group Membership (Standing and Special)
Working Group membership shall be open to any Green Party member willing to participate. Voting privileges are reserved for those members who have attended or participated in at least two Working Group meetings within the previous 12 months (except for the first two meetings of a newly formed Group).
*** In original Restructuring proposal, this was "must have attended one previous Working Group session." Bylaws Committee recommends requiring attendance in least two WG meetings to make it easier for a WG meeting to satisfy quorum. ***

6-1.7	Ex-Officio Members
Ex-officio members are Group members by virtue of office as defined in these bylaws or in the Group's charge. Ex-officio members have all the privileges of other Group members, including the right to vote, but not the obligation to attend meetings regularly. Unless present, ex-officio members are not counted in determining quorum.

6-1.8	Standing Group Liaison to the Coordinating Committee
Each Standing Group shall be assigned a Coordinating Committee (CC) member by the CC to serve as liaison to the CC, an ex-officio member of the Group. The liaison is charged with facilitating communications between the Group and the CC. Liaisons appointed to Standing Committees also serve as one of the committee coordinators (see group coordinators, paragraph 6-1.9).

6-1.9	Group Coordinators (Standing and Special)
All Groups shall possess two coordinators (see coordinator duties, paragraph 6-2.7). Standing Committees shall elect one coordinator from among its membership in addition to the CC-appointed liaison-coordinator. All other Groups shall elect two coordinators from among its membership. Elected coordinators shall take office upon confirmation by the General Assembly and, while still eligible, shall serve for two years in staggered terms whenever possible or until a successor is elected and confirmed.

SECTION 6-2.  GENERAL DUTIES, AUTHORITY, AND FUNCTIONS.

6-2.1	Group Work Plan
Each Group shall prepare a yearly work plan to be submitted to the Coordinating Committee along with any budget requests. The work plan will identify the objectives of the Group for that year, any proposals it foresees bringing before the General Assembly, and a projected timeline for the Group's activities. The stated objectives must be congruent with the Group's Statement of Purpose and the Goals and Strategies of the GPCA.

6-2.2	Group Meetings and Deliberations
Each Group shall determine how many meetings are necessary to achieve the objectives outlined in its work plan. Each Group shall prepare and announce the proposed meeting agenda at least two weeks in advance of the meeting date. New agenda items announced after this date shall be for information only and not for action. All deliberative and decision-making meetings shall be open to all Green Party members unless closed by a 2/3 vote of the membership. However, even closed meetings may be required by the General Assembly to publish the minutes of its proceedings. 

6-2.3	Group Quorum
A quorum is more than 50% of a Group's voting membership. For Working Group meetings properly announced in the agenda distributed prior to a regular meeting of the General Assembly, a quorum is more than 50% of the voting membership OR one Group coordinator and at least four additional voting members, whichever is less.

6-2.4	Group Decision-Making
The decision-making process in Groups may be informal but must be consistent where feasible with the process described in Section 5-9. Proxy votes are not allowed.

6-2.5	Proposal Authority
All proposals to be considered by the General Assembly must first be approved and presented by a Standing Committee or Standing Working Group. Exceptions may be allowed for proposals to be considered in the Consent Calendar (see consent calendar, paragraph 5-9.11).

6-2.6	Proposal Presentation
Groups will act in the role of advocate for the proposals they present to the General Assembly. The presenter will disclose to the General Assembly whether the Group brings the proposal forward with consensus or by a vote. If by a vote, the details of the vote will be presented.

6-2.7	Group Coordinator Duties
The responsibilities of the Group coordinators shall include:
a)	Preparing and announcing the proposed agenda for a Group meeting;
b)	Facilitating and coordinating the activities of the Group;
c)	Submitting Group work plans and budgets to the Coordinating Committee;
d)	Presenting Group proposals or other official communications to the General Assembly;
e)	Maintaining a physical notebook containing the Group's Statement of Purpose, membership information, meeting minutes, and any other documents relevant to the work of the Group;
f)	Filing meeting agendas and minutes with the Coordinating Committee secretary in a timely fashion including a summary report after the conclusion of a General Assembly meeting with general contact information, active membership list, and status report;
g)	Designating a temporary acting coordinator to perform the duties outlined above whenever an official coordinator is unable to perform those duties, and notifying the CC and Group membership accordingly.



ARTICLE 7.  STANDING COMMITTEES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY

SECTION 7-1.  COORDINATING COMMITTEE (AKA THE CC)

[no change] 

SECTION 7-2  FINANCE COMMITTEE (FORMERLY SECTION 7-10)

7-2.1	Duties and Authority
The Finance Committee is charged with overseeing the financial operations of the GPCA. This includes working with the Treasurer to:
a)	Collect county dues and any other moneys owed to the GPCA;
b)	Facilitate the allocation and disbursement of funds;
c)	Provide quarterly financial reports to the CC;
d)	Provide an annual budget report to the plenary;
e)	Provide any official reporting required by the State of California;
f)	Be the conduit for GPCA fundraising activities.

7-2.2	Ex Officio Member
a)	The Treasurer.

[the rest of the original Section 7-10 is not changed]

SECTION 7-3.  BYLAWS COMMITTEE

7-3.1	Duties and Authority
The Bylaws Committee is charged with maintaining the GPCA Bylaws and assisting with their amendment or revision. All Bylaw amendment proposals must be reviewed by the Bylaws Committee before submission to the General Assembly.

7-3.2	Bylaws Interpretation
In cases of bylaw ambiguity or procedural disagreement, the General Assembly shall decide for itself the meaning of its bylaws or the appropriate procedure to be followed. Between General Assembly meetings, the Coordinating Committee shall decide these questions subject to review at the next General Assembly meeting. The Bylaws Committee and its coordinators are charged with assisting with the interpretation of the Bylaws and the resolution of procedural questions.

SECTION 7-4.  PLATFORM COMMITTEE

7-4.1	Duties and Authority
The Platform Committee is charged with maintaining the Platform of the GPCA and assisting with its amendment or revision. All platform proposals must be reviewed by the Platform Committee before submission to the General Assembly.

7-4.2	Platform Research and Interpretation
The Platform Committee shall identify issues not in the platform, and suggest and formulate platform planks with substantial input from appropriate experts in the field. The Platform Committee shall also assist the General Assembly, the Coordinating Committee, and the Media Spokespersons with formulating positions or statements on issues or initiatives related to official platform positions.

SECTION 7-5.  INTERNATIONAL PROTOCOL COMMITTEE

7-5.1	Duties and Authority
The International Protocol Committee is charged with administrating, hosting, and networking with international Greens.


SECTION 7-6.  CLEARINGHOUSE COMMITTEE

7-6.1	Duties and Authority
The Clearinghouse Committee is charged with maintaining an archive of all GPCA documents and data. The Clearinghouse Committee is also charged with facilitating internal and external communications and information dissemination including maintaining the GPCA website and returning communications received by phone, email, and postal mail.

7-6.2	Ex Officio Members
a)	The Liaison to the Secretary of State.
b)	A Webmaster appointed by the committee.

ARTICLE 8.  STANDING WORKING GROUPS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY 

SECTION 8-1. GRASSROOTS ORGANIZING WORKING GROUP

8-1.1	Mission Statement
The Grassroots Organizing Working Group (GROW) is charged with facilitating voter registration activities and organizing locals by:
a)	Coordinating locals into statewide efforts to register Green Party voters and do public outreach;
b)	Providing training for county locals in tabling and other grassroots organizing activities;
c)	Developing, maintaining, and providing resources for tabling efforts and organization of locals;
d)	Maintaining lists of registered Green Party voters.

SECTION 8-2.  CAMPAIGNS AND CANDIDATES WORKING GROUP

8-2.1	Mission Statement
The Campaigns & Candidates Working Group is charged with facilitating the electoral work of the party by:
a)	Educating Green Party members about GPCA electoral strategy;
b)	Identifying key political campaigns in which Green Party activists can play a pivotal role;
c)	Identifying registered Greens who would make credible candidates;
d)	Promoting and facilitating effective regional strategies for winning campaigns;
e)	Training Green Party activists in methods of waging political campaigns;
f)	Facilitating fundraising operations for GPCA-endorsed electoral campaigns.

SECTION 8-3.  ELECTORAL REFORM WORKING GROUP

8-3.1	Mission Statement
The Electoral Reform Working Group is charged with facilitating the electoral reform work of the party by:
a)	Educating Green Party members, the public, and the media about GPCA-endorsed electoral reforms;
b)	Identifying strategies for enacting GPCA-endorsed electoral reforms;
c)	Promoting and facilitating local and statewide campaigns for GPCA-endorsed electoral reforms;
d)	Advising GPCA on internal party voting mechanisms and electoral policy.

SECTION 8-4.  GREEN ISSUES WORKING GROUP

8-4.1	Mission Statement
The Green Issues Working Group is charged with facilitating the Green issues work of the party by:
a)	Identifying, facilitating discussion, and preparing proposals on issues and events that should be addressed by the GPCA;
b)	Advise the Platform Committee on the development of platform proposals on issues identified by the Working Group;
c)	Promoting and providing support for Green issues to candidates running for office;
d)	Building coalitions with other organizations working on Green issues.
